David Price.
We're focusing today on contemporary issues of production of the book, yet for my twenty minutes, I'm going to go back to the Renaissance at the beginning of printing, to study some of the difficulties of these printers, editors, and designers in the production of the Bibles.
It was different back then.
Nowadays we don't worry that much about preaching the Bible.
It's not something that causes so much anxiety.
Whereas from the Renaissance period it was an act that always occasioned a tremendous amount of worry and concern.
It was a time when the greatest intellect, even the most powerful kings and queens, were very much concerned with the production of the Bible.
In the Renaissance, it was impossible to print the Bible without considering many facets of the simple question, what is the Bible?
The question included the problem of canonicity, what are the books of the Bible, as well as the more basic problem of determining whether a text is authentic or not.
An exceptionally difficult question concerns the ancient version.
In particular, how authentic is the Latin Vulgate translation of St.
Jerome that was the basis for liturgy and for theology in a Christian church in the West for over a thousand years?
What must one make for those many passages that are missing in or do not quite do justice to the earliest Hebrew and Greek manuscripts?
In some ways, the most confident Bibles are the first ones.
Printing began with the Bible in a format designed to replicate the appearance of the manuscript Bible in folia, a style of monumentality and authority.
Soon, other formats would follow.
Many attendees should erupt and ready to use.
That's what people write.
Also, I want to mention that too.
I'm really not too worried about the price, it doesn't fail either.
Soon other formats appeared, and I'm showing you very briefly on the project, the first Octavo edition of the Bible, 1491.
But all those scientific texts appeared, for the Vulgate manuscripts recorded a tremendous number of ancient systems, the result of erroneous transcription, interpolation, and unsuccessful attempts at correction.
A major result of the first 75 years of preaching the Bible from Luther to Luther was that the manifold uncertainty of the text became widely appreciated.
Consequently, editors and printers face a number of dilemmas.
Most importantly, how should the authority of the Bible be represented, whether grounded in the church, state, theological principle, or in textual historical scholarship?
This became a very serious question, or its immediate corollary was, as a text underwent Reformation, does that mean that the religious culture to the extent that it has developed from the now undermined or reconstituted authorities also face Reformation?
The best way to stabilize a text with various meanings is systematically to collect and analyze the barriers, a process called collation.
This had more or less been accomplished for the Hebrew Bible with the ancient Masoretic criticism of the text.
We just saw it in 1488.
We're seeing it in 1488, the very first edition of the complete .
But...
After the printing of 1488, the Hebrew Bible was the object of steady textual improvement until 1424-25 when the President Daniel Longbow issued the second great rabbinic Bible
for correct printing of this matura.
And this illustrates to us that the Renaissance Hebrew Bible depended entirely on the textual criticism of the mass religious, not on Renaissance scholars themselves.
And this Bible was so correct, so generally satisfying, that it set a standard that lasted for 400 years.
While the Hebrew Bible thus could depend on the criticism of the early Middle Ages, there was no comparable body of ancient textual criticism for the Greek New Testament.
The Greek New Testament first appeared at the rather late days of 1516, and would not be stabilized in all of its textual variance to general satisfaction until 1550, with the publication of an edition by Old L.P.M.
which you have seen on your left.
This edition, which is among the typographical masterpieces of the Renaissance, was published with the authority of the King of Crafts, making its royalty, a designation echoed in the name of the elegant font of Cloth-Germont's collection noir.
In addition to artistry and
In addition to the art history, the scholarship of this book was so impressive that its text would be designated the Text History Chapters, the received or motivated text.
It would also be called the Protestant Pope.
Above all, it is important for us to notice that A.T.N.
documented the manuscript authority for his reading, providing barriers in the margins, allowing readers to understand the substance of the manuscript tradition and also to disagree with his editorial decision and theoretically to alter the text.
Prior to the refinements of A.P.M.
and Baumau, the most radical formats of the Renaissance Bible were the multiple version or polyglot violets.
Consciously or not, these important imprints address the issue of the sufficiency of the ball gates, and they almost always do so with ambivalence or contradiction.
The most spectacular of these was the Comfortenzi polyglot, and the most controversial was Erasmus' zyglot violets.
The Constantinian Polyglot, the masterpiece of Spanish Humanism, is a six-volume work published in 1522 that presents a biblical text in Hebrew, Aramaic, Greek, and Latin.
The imprint documents the thesis of its editor-in-chief, Cardinal Jiménez, that, quote,
meaning of heavenly wisdom can emerge from any language, but that, after translating, Scripture still remains full of meanings which are not able to be understood in any way other than from the very fonts of the original language."
And here we see the tremendous anxiety about the status of the Vulgate.
The editors contradict this undertaking by asserting the religious superiority of the Latin Vulgate over the textuality of Judaism and Eastern Orthodoxy.
The introduction describes the typographical layout with the Vulgate and the central column flanked by the original Hebrew and the Septuagint Greek translation as an analogy to, quote, Christ on the cross in between the two deeds.
Without mentioning any Christ dependence on Christ.
The typography attempts to authenticate the Vulgate by providing an alphabetic system of coordinates that connects every word in the Vulgate to a word in the original Hebrew.
This system was also used in the New Testament to a certain degree.
I'm showing you here the passage in Arceus 7.14, where the correspondence between Wirgo, virgin, and Alkmaa, young woman, is a surgeon.
Of course, an incorrect translation that's been pointed out in certain audiences, even in the 20th century, can provoke tremendous unhappiness.
That was one of the big problems of the New Revolution.
Nonetheless, the inconsistencies between the virgins were powerful.
When Erasmus published his first Greek text for the New Testament, he had the Samaritans to translate scripture fresh into Latin, thereby impugning the Hulgate's authority.
In the dedicatory letter to Pope Leo X,
Erasmus proclaimed the original text as a foundation, even if it still looked like rubble, for a reconstruction of the temple, an analogy of doctrinal reformation to Leo's rebuilding of St.
Peter's kingdom.
Nonetheless, the new Latin translation shook the foundations of St.
Peter's, for it showed all too clearly that the Greek did not support several theological conclusions that had been drawn from the Latin Vulgate.
These were not incidentals, they included the sacrament of reconciliation, and Erasmus' wording in many cases was suspected of having diminished the divinity of Christ.
So great were the controversies, and so bitter the hard feelings of eclectic circles once Luther had entered the page, that beginning with his fourth edition of 1527, Erasmus printed the Vulgate with the Greek and with his own version, an attempt, backpedaling rapidly, to authenticate the Vulgate and also to stress the general compatibility of his version with it.
These are squabbles about scholarly editions.
Anxiety about the text's authority increased exponentially as Princey put books into the hands of ordinary people.
Indeed, the scholarly analysis of the Bible raised the issue of preparing reliable translations in the vernacular for general readership.
Even when vernacular Bibles were legal, and there were many 15th century Bibles in German and Italian,
The question remained as to whether the Bible in the hands of the people would foster faith, fire imaginations of heresy, or even worse, result in social revolution.
The early Lutheran design for the Bible
was intended to destabilize the concept of authority in a general way.
It is intriguing that the Lutheran Bibles do not claim special distinction from their foundation in the original languages.
It's a private strategy because Luther was hardly the first to put the Bible into German, but he was the first to base the German Bible on the Hebrew and the Greek.
Even more surprisingly, the Lutheran Bibles printed in Wittenberg are designed to look like ordinary books.
They create a visual tone of everydayness rather than a tone of resultedness, befitting a timeless authority.
The text is printed in one block, but the typography relaxed, unpretentious, but that is probably vernacular.
It is really a kind of rough, common, popular typeset approach to the image of the typeset.
Luther himself spoke of his translation as a book bound by temporal contingencies, acknowledging repeatedly that the translation must be sense for sense, put as plainly and idiomatically as possible, that the words were dependent on contemporary usage, not the syntax of antiquity.
Luther once said that people reading a vernacular version should have the feeling that the Bible had been written only yesterday.
I believe we can get a good sense of Luther's attitude by looking at the title page of the first complete Lutheran Bible, the result of a tremendous scholarly and literary effort of some 12 years.
Despite his labor, the feat of completion is represented with a charming display of playfulness.
The title page for the first Lutheran translation does not convey the feeling of the German word with timeless authority.
Rather, it looks as if the Putti have just barely finished the whole in time for its first before the public of Guru's debut.
The point may be,
But the word of translation is never concluded, even if God superintends this moment of performing the latest, but never the last version, which will warrant for the immutability of the message.
May God's word remain forever.
The populous style of the Lutheran Bible had other properties that are less appealing to modern sensibilities.
It was designed to promote its popular antagonism against the authority of the Catholic Church.
One might go so far as to compare the first edition of the Lutheran New Testament to the ferocious polemical pamphlets of the era, especially those with popular imagery.
In particular, marginal notes betray confessional biases, and in what we might call the Bible's visual boxes, that is the illustration, the papacy appears most dramatically as the Antichrist in the scripture.
The heart of Babylon includes the beast from the bottomless pit of revelation where papal crowns
The Lutheran's visual gloss does not aim solely at any film.
It is much more offensive than that.
It offers a seriously intense interpretation that the Bible prophesies the Antichrist's emergence in the papacy.
This is a view Luther would hold throughout his life and one that would inform the Lutheran illustrations of it with other revelations henceforth.
Idiom and polemic aside,
One of the boldest moves in his early Lutheran inference in the New Testament was the reassessment of the canon.
Luther argued that his definition of the gospel, the promise of salvation by faith alone, and his identification of scripture of the law and the gospel could help implicate what belonged to the canon of the Bible.
He was daring enough to write, in the preface of his first translation, that four books in the New Testament did not articulate the Gospel methods adequately.
These he grouped together and ended the New Testament in partial contribution of all the traditional sequences and did not assign the number to those books of the New Testament.
This style of authentication and polemics informed the early history of the English Bible as well.
Although he did consult the original Greek and Hebrew, William Tyndale in large measure English Luther's German version, including several of Luther's notes and prologues.
The Tyndale imprints, however, can look even more popular and more subversive than the Lutheran models.
Unlike Luther's, after all, Tyndale's Bible started life, his Bible started life with alcohol.
Indeed, they were burned in bonfires, just as their author would be.
The first attempt to print an English Bible, and that is where Tyndale on the right, his Bible in his very first attempt, was stopped by authorities in Cologne after ten signatures of a fourth of the New Testament had been completed.
But, from that fragment we know that the original Tyndale New Testament was designed to have all of the characteristics of Luther's New Testament.
The theological and polemical side-depth table of contents you're looking at with the altar canon and the introduction of Luther's version.
The first legal Tyndale Bible appeared in 1537 with a title-page point cut between Tyndale 100.
with the title page woodcut taken from an important Lutheran Bible, 1534.
The authorizing principle here is the Lutheran concept of the law and the gospel.
This imprint was one of four authorized English versions to appear before the King James Version.
And those four altogether are the Coverdale, 1535, this one you look at in the left, which is called the Matthew Bible, the Great Bible, 1539, and the Bishop Bible, 1568, which turns to the second left.
All of these were designed as stately lectern Bibles and folios.
They were typically presented with a prominent display of the royal supremacy, the English law of Ephesians 15-34 that crowned with the ultimate authority for religious values in England.
Which you see very clearly on the first English title page, the first reading of the Bible, the covering of the title page on the right at the bottom, Henry VIII is dispensing the Bible to
both Archbishop Cranmer and to Vice-Regent Thomas Cranmer.
A new conceptualization of the English Bible as the Book of the People appeared in 1560 with the publication of the Geneva version.
The Geneva Bible, the runaway bestseller during Elizabeth's reign, was a Bible that government did not endorse, even if it was dedicated to Queen Elizabeth.
It originated among the exiles fleeing the grief for bloody persecution under Queen Mary.
But by the time it appeared in 1560, there was no legal impediment to its distribution in England.
Perhaps in response to these dramatic changes in political climate, its design combines qualities of the subversive, popular, and authoritative.
Arriving in popular dissent, the editors, backed up by the resources of the Genevan Academy and its French language bibles, used a principle of access to the fullness of scholarship as its authorizing principle.
This directly floutes the enriching custom and quasi-law that no private opinion be expressed in the notes of printed Bibles.
The design, fittingly, evokes both popular and scholarly qualities.
The authoritative two-column look of the Bible as a monument is used here in small format.
This is actually a small folio.
The original was of course, but I hope you have a picture of it.
It's similar to this, but you can imagine it's chopped off three quarters of the way down.
The almost unprecedented use of a Roman font gives the imprint clarity and also the aura of Latin learning.
At this time, Latin books, and not vernacular books, were set to relate the Roman type in English.
The success of the Geneva Bible, and it went through 144 positions in the years,
The success of the Geneva may have become the source of its own downfall, for its distinctive interpretive apparatus grew ever more extensive and also increasingly contentious.
It prevailed over the Bishop's Bible in the homes of the people, for its text was lucid and its learning seemed the source of self-empowerment.
But a richly Calvinist message eventually overwhelmed the biblical text, so numerous for the notes that virtually everyone could find something noisome.
King James I
For King James I, a Calvinist comment on iconoclasm that boldly endorsed race and reticite was beyond the pale.
I've been showing you an image from a 1607 newspaper that actually represents the most extreme development of the scholarly apparatus written for a lot of translations.
Before the King James Version, the Church of England sponsored a new Bible as an answer to the Geneva Version.
It is called the Bishop's Bible because the philosophical work was organized by Archbishop Matthew Parker and done by him and other bishops in the realm.
And if you look at it in the past, you probably think it might be difficult to call it the Queen Elizabeth Version.
The textual result was a modern reworking of Tyndale as present in the Great Bible Version.
The Bishop's Bible is typographically the most majestic of the 16th century English Bibles.
It is also a magnificent display of the law of royal supremacy, the crown's authority over the church and the realm.
For the time of day, the first edition displays a large form of an image of the queen herself,
This exquisitely engraved title page proclaims no theological concept that provides authority, it is just the authority of the government that authenticated this version.
The richly illustrated design also inserts courtly portraiture into the text
The court favorites, William Cecil and Lord Robert Dudley, appear in engravings.
Cecil is presented on your right as a biblical scholar who did have tremendous confidence in his language.
And Dudley is on your right, introducing the second part of the Old Testament.
Rather more, if you've seen the movie, Elizabeth is the more dignified setting for his portrait.
The King James Version,
which entailed a rigorous review of the scholarship, as well as the artistry of previous translations, also responded to the dilemma of how to present the Bible appropriately.
First, in what is probably a conception of pure sensibility, the text is not presented as being dependent on the loyal will.
The printing was licensed by the Crown, initially with an extensive copyright, but the printer Robert Barber acquired 3,500 pounds.
But distribution was not a royal pact.
Instead of the royal supremacy, the most common title-paged concept
expressed the unity of Scripture in comparison to the 12 tribes of Israel and the 12 apostles of Jesus, which even suggests the Covenants of Theology of Calvinism.
And that, in fact, was on the original.
The first we called it a 16-left title page.
And the 12 tribes were represented within the disciples of the law.
And in this, this is the more typical presentation of the 7th century of King James.
It was a very dramatic presentation of that analogy.
The iconography of Loyal Supremacy may well have been brought up in Holgarity, and in life is sent to the Geneva Bible an inadequate mode of authorization.
The translators and designers chose a format dramatically different from that of the Geneva.
Apart from the historical material in the preface, the King James Version is unflossed.
It also departs from the bishop's file by being unillustrated, except for the few illustrations on the historical introduction.
Without expressing theological or historical opinion, the biblical text is supported by only three types of textual notes, references to parallel passages, content notes to a volume of passages, and most important, typographical indication of where the English text
in smooth idiomatic form departs from the original Greek and Hebrew.
I'm sorry.
You can see the departures from the original languages are indicated in Roman type, whereas the text of the one has great confidence in the black letter.
Can you see some of those examples of Roman type?
And this is obviously an attempt at providing a bare test for the people.
In response to the popular market, small size form designs were developed by the following year, in 1612.
The first octavo, the first cordas came out there.
And they also used two column Roman font designs derived from the Geneva, and in this case used the palace to indicate textual problems in English translations.
Thus,
The authorized version in its format negotiates monumentality and vernacularism on the one hand, and the authority and uncertainty of the text on the other.
Its authority emanates from the text which stands alone, unillustrated and largely unannotated.
Yet this text conveys, typographically, the findings of the philological and historical scholarship.
The King James Version brilliantly answers the question, what is the Bible, and also indicates in the subtlety of the format and design what is not the Bible.
If we look back to the very beginning of printing...
Right in the back.
Back in the back.
If we look back to the very beginning of printing and reflect on where we have gotten in the 150 years we've just covered, we might conclude that what primarily differentiates the Gugler of the King James Version is not at all a shift from the traditional to the reform, nor a move from the monumental to the vernacular, but rather the replacement of an invisible confidence in the text with visible evidence for the authority of each of the words in the Word of God.
Thank you.
That's why I have the first sign up.
Great.
I dreamed of doing a Bible for over 30 years.
A dream that was both sweet and terrifying.
Like all dreams, it came from somewhere inside me.
There were no coercive voices that said I had to do it.
No publisher commissioned it.
Yet I was compelled to do it.
In fact, I feel that everything in my life, from six years in a military school, to pearl hunting, to three years as an itinerant Methodist preacher, has led me inexorably to it.
And it was often a frightening place to be, frightening because it assumes standards that go beyond the already difficult and concrete nature of fine typography, good draftsmanship, solid design, and clean engraving.
Frightening because it assumes standards that are, by their very nature, speculative and extend toward the nature of God and divine teachings.
Frightening because whether or not I wished it or intended it, I knew that every time I made an image, I would be taking a theological position, and this would leave me vulnerable to misunderstanding, miscalculation, naivete, and stupidity.
When it comes to images, I have an allergy to the obvious and expected, to the corny and cute, to happy and trite.
I avoid them whenever I can recognize them.
But one cannot avoid Adam and Eve, happy as though it is, and claim to have illustrated by them.
One cannot ignore the garden or the servants, even though
And even though an illustrator is wedded to attack, he can maneuver within it to establish fresh points of view and find new and provocative light.
Indeed, this is the illustrator's responsibility.
For instance, my Adam and Eve were originally happening.
Since the human species sprang up in the old divided gorge, I felt that it was a reasonable and logical point of view
Besides that, I figured he would piss off Pat Robertson and Jerry Paul.
Anything that does that can't be all bad.
The idea remained firm for a long time, so I went to a dinner party in Princeton in 1995.
Two of my companions, Joyce Carol Otis and Alexander Nahimas, thought the idea was sound and would ring a wake-up bell for many readers at the outset.
But John Fleming took exception, arguing that since racial characteristics were much, much later in manifesting themselves, the only appropriate position would be one that was racially moot.
It became apparent that my personal politics were getting in the way of my work.
This is not African literature.
It is not European literature.
It's Semitic literature.
So I had to ask myself, what image of Adam and Eve did the Semitic authors have in mind?
Because that is to whom I owe my allegiance.
The text thinks very clearly that God made Adam after his own image.
Midrash, Jewish commentaries on Hebrew scripture, tells us that he was the most beautiful man that would ever be.
But,
Does beauty have only to do with the young?
Are we to think of God as Apollo or Adonis?
Shouldn't we consider the beauty inherent in age and wisdom?
I think yes.
So, taking a cue from Rembrandt's etching of a been around the block a few times avenue, I seen them as an older couple.
Their faces are in shadow, allowing you to see there what you want to see.
The serpent, not yet on his belly,
is carefully hidden behind a tree, suggesting that he is a warrior, hiding, watching, and perhaps, as some in Russian tradition, timing, waiting to have his way with Eve.
God's presence is suggested by the river, prefiguring Ezekiel's simile, comparing God's voice to the noise of many waters.
I never represented God, didn't want to, couldn't have if I wanted to.
but I did represent the natural attributes given to him by the authors, smoke, clouds, water, lightning, and approaching storm, such as this one looming over Noah's sons as they prepared the ark for the oncoming day.
This image, like many others, owes a debt,
to extra-biblical sources, in this case to an old Romanian folktale about Noah's two cats who evict the devil when he is discovered on board in the guise of a very large and sinister rat.
Cats are nowhere mentioned in the Bible.
This image hopes to amend that slight oversight.
The primary theme of my illustrations for the Bible is, for lack of a more original phrase, the human condition.
The ordinary day-to-day problems and passions of the human heart, as William Faulkner put it.
And it will probably get me in deep doo-doo with the fundamentals.
My characters are not pious.
They do not carry the odor of sanctity with them, nor the beauty of holiness.
They are real people, neither stylized nor archetypical.
They live in both light and shadow.
There's somebody you might know, like the boy Donald Hall, who sat for this portrait of Ecclesiastes.
And like Ecclesiastes, they are, for the most part, seen alone.
Alone because it is a convention of portraiture, and alone because that is where, ultimately, we all meet
and wrestled with God, or with the idea of God.
Here is the young Abram, a formal portrait of a tall young man full of life and vigor, a man on the cusp of founding a nation, a people.
And here is Job, alone in prison, in prison because he rejected the amorous advances of Potiphar's wife, Zella.
Scorned, Zoica tells her husband that Joseph tried to force himself on her, and she ran away.
Potiphar, of course, believes her.
His wrath is kindled against Joseph and throws him into the hooscow.
And here is Moses at the Red Sea.
Moses, the only man in the Old Testament who knew God face to face.
stands atop a stony embankment at the edge of the sea.
His people, offstage here, are following him because they believe he is working on God's instructions.
But if he heard God wrong or misunderstood, and you know he must have had his doubts because he was, after all, human.
The hard-won exodus will end here, and a heap of torn flesh is the bottom of this cliff.
Moses stands alone, hoping, with Pharaoh's armies closing in fast upon them, that he heard God's instructions write, hoping that the sea will part and his people will pass on safely into the promised land.
Moses stands alone too, although in an entirely different way.
When he marries an Ethiopian woman and has to endure the acrimony of his sister Miriam and his brother Aaron, poor Miriam turns leprous as white as snow as a result of her exasperation, an appropriately ironic punishment for her bituperation against Moses' union with the black woman.
And as we consider Moses, you will recall that the two tables of testimony were originally hewn by God himself, written with the finger of God, given to Moses by God to bring to his Hebrew people his covenant.
But when Moses came down from the mountain with the tables, he found his people dancing and worshiping a golden calf.
Indignant, angry, and hurt,
Moses cast the tables out of his hands and broke them.
Well, that didn't go down any too well.
Moses felt that he had failed and wanted to be relieved of his commands, as it were.
But God would have nothing to do with that.
He told Moses that the journey to the promised land must continue.
So Moses hewed the second set of tablets.
Hewed them with his own hands this time.
with mantis and chisel, and he hauled them up the cold, windy moraine of Sinai to have God ascribe them one more time.
When he died, at 120 years, God himself buried Moses in a valley in the land of Moab in an unmarked and unknown settler.
He died alone, and he was buried alone.
Though here,
through an image filched from Katie Kolovitz etching the downed crotton, an angel raves for Moses, as did the children of Israel.
Now one could easily do 230 images of the Pentateuch alone.
And I could complete all of my time here this afternoon by showing nothing but the images from that one section.
Let's move on and look at two of the images from the books of the history.
Look at Samson, for instance, slayer of lions and Philistine.
He falls for the duplicitous Delilah.
He gets drunk with her, makes love with her.
And in his drunken passion, he discloses the secret of strength, then passes out.
Delilah, who's been sipping tea or something, cuts off his hair.
and delivers him into the hands of his enemies who blind him and throw him in prison.
Then later on a feast day of the god Dagon, the Philistine bigwigs call Samson up out of prison to have a little sport with him.
Turns out it wasn't a very good idea for the Philistines.
Thousands of people were there drinking and singing and having a lecherous good old time.
A boy is sent to fetch Samson, and when he does, Samson implores the boy to take him to the two pillars that support the temple.
The lad does, and Samson asks, and I hope runs away.
But it is at this moment that we see Samson.
His hair has grown back, and his shoulders are starved from years under the whip.
He is found with one of the two pillars and is about to find with the other.
It is this moment before he sacrifices himself that I imagine Samson hesitates and then he says, O Lord God, remember me and strengthen me only this once, O God, that I may be avenged of the Philistines for my two eyes.
And he heaved with all of his might
And the house fell upon all those that were there yet.
Well, a lot of Philistines died that day.
Three thousand were hanging out on the roof alone when the building came coming down.
Samson died too, alone.
And consider Erizba, a concubine of Saul who bore his two sons.
Years later, when David is king, he discovered that Saul kills some neighboring Gibeonites, despite the existence of a covenant of friendship.
The Gibeonites demanded a belated retaliation, and David, believing that the blood guilt had to be removed, ordered that seven Saul's sons be given over, including Rizpah and the two boys.
They were hanged.
and their grieving mother watched over them for a month or more, suffering neither the birds of the air to rest upon them by day, nor the beasts of the field by night.
To read the Bible can be an extremely unpleasant experience sometimes because there is a lot of blood-led decapitations, murders, rapes, incest, you name it.
The books of poetry
offer opportunities of a different sort, specifically the occasion to use metaphors and similes.
For instance, in the 34th Psalm, we read that the afflictions of the righteous are many, but the Lord delivereth him out of them all.
For Bart Ryder, of course, was not a biblical issue.
It was admitted in Decap, Illinois, in 1874.
As I meditated on the affliction of the righteous, I remembered a line by Albert Camus in his essay, Return to Tukasa.
He said that he was brought up surrounded by beauty, which was his only wealth.
Then, he said, came the bar of the fire.
I mean, tyranny's war
police force.
Well, since this is Jewish literature, it follows that the antecedents of the righteous are Jews.
Thus, I have to ask what, then, would be the greatest affliction of the righteous?
To me, a non-Jew in the 20th century, it must be, and only be, the Holocaust.
And what better symbol of that unspeakable travesty than barbed wire?
its incessant repetition of cruel, twisted bars, a cicado drumbeat of hellish swasticalite glosses.
This is not my only reference to the Holocaust.
For instance, this image is based on Zechariah 1.4, Turn ye now from your evil ways and from your evil doings.
Though they did not hear.
Evil does not reside in acts alone.
Evil does not live in Jasper, Texas, or Sylacauga, Alabama, or Laramie, Wyoming.
Evil is not the activities of the Ku Klux Klan, nor the night of broken glass.
Evil is what generates and spawns in those places and underlies those actions.
arrogance, dogma, fear, hate, bigotry, ignorance, and territoriality.
The murder of tens of millions of people in Europe in the 40s and the slaughter of the innocents in Bosnia, Guatemala, and Oklahoma City are the result of the actions of people who believe that they are right, believe that they know the mind of God, believe that their actions, no matter how heinous
or justified.
My meditation led me to the burning cross, a perverted symbol and one that is not entirely unrelated to the barbed wire or to the broken cross of the swastika.
Perhaps in its perversion, the burning cross is a perfect and simple image for evil, and it resonates personally for me
given that I come from a line of people who burn them, grandfather and apostle.
And that brings me to the cross itself.
There is a tradition in printing the English Bible that the New Testament be printed first, and I follow suit, but for pragmatic reasons, not symbolic.
Since Christian theology holds that the Old Testament points to the New and is fulfilled by it, I, as illustrator, needed to be able to look ahead when it came time to image the Old Testament.
I would need to know what it would be that I would be pointing to.
The only way I could do that would be to do the New Testament first.
So I began at the end and worked my way backwards to the beginning.
Adam and Eve in the Garden was the last image I did completed on February 22, 1999.
I began with the crucifixion summer 1996.
It was for me then the most important and difficult image in the whole book and I wanted to get it done and out of the way.
I wanted to be able to change my mind if I wanted to do it over again maybe.
I followed a state course of action by doing it as a variation of the crucifixion I did for Dante's Paradiso in 1982.
Doing so at that time, it seemed to me, was not so much an easy way out, which admittedly it was, as it was a beginning from where I left off.
But restating an old composition nagged it.
Not that I haven't restated old compositions before, because I have.
Like Handel, I've done it a lot.
And it wasn't because it was an incompetent image.
It was interestingly composed, energetically executed, and had the essential elements of mystery and agony.
But something wasn't right about my involvement, wasn't right about my attachment.
That I was being cowardly,
didn't occur to me right then, though now I think that was precisely the case.
I engraved it anyway, put it aside, and moved on to the raising of Lazarus.
But as I continued making my way through the four Gospels, I could not stop thinking that I had missed something important back there in my first confrontation with Golgotha.
Then I gave a speech about the project at the University of Kansas.
I showed slides of some of the finished images of the Annunciation.
The death of John the Baptist.
The agony in the garden.
Agge homo.
And then I projected a slide of the crucifixion.
And I read the verse from Matthew that captions it.
There were two thieves crucified with him, one on the right hand and another on the left.
And them that passed by reviled him and wagged their head.
Well, hearing myself read that text as I looked at my very safe image, a hundred times or more magnified,
convinced me that I had to go back.
I had to muster my courage and go back to Golgotha and start over again.
Get involved personally.
Get involved at the level where din and blood and dirt mingles.
And I had to look at it hard, harder than I had done before.
I had to be there, as the old DM asks, when they nailed him to the tree.
Had to do something that was distinctly uncomfortable.
Had to bring it to a human, common level, like Bruegel did.
had to see it as a mother and child on the way to market might have seen it out of the corner of their eyes just passing by, not wanting to have anything to do with it.
Perhaps they were repulsed by the blood and screams.
Perhaps they hid their eyes.
Perhaps the child asked, why, mama?
And the mother couldn't answer.
And they moved on.
Needing to get by the mordacious crowd and go on with their lives.
Go home and fix a dinner.
Tell a story.
Yet others didn't pass by.
They stopped.
Stopped and watched.
Perhaps talked politics or religion.
Laughed at the man hanging from the tree tree bleeding.
clap their arms made in imitation of the crows that pecked at the eyes and living flesh of Christ of the two thieves.
Maybe a vendor sold snacks, popcorn, and raisin nets.
And then, of course, there were those who stayed because they loved the men, the men, and stayed to endure with them the indigo darkness that was about to overcome the moon.
Their mournful sobs overwhelmed by the din of sniggering laughter, of sarcastic derisions, of the squawking of carrion birds, and the growling of feral dogs dickering over the blood reaching into the dirt.
However, if one accepts the redemptive doctrine of the New Testament, one has to come to grips, it seems to me, with the fact that Jesus died for the atonement of the people who reviled him as much as he did for those who mourned and ate in their hearts for him.
For me, the earlier comfortable composition did not say anything.
To say what I needed to say, I had to abandon the usual graphic conventions of my image making, and I had to introduce jarring subject matter, like the courish, malicious crowd, eating and scorning with laughter, the dog, symbol of Rome and Goya,
and a more complicated, resonating symbol when one considers that one of the causes of death by crucifixion was the loss of blood from having the lower legs torn open by scavenging dogs.
And birds, the sounds of the birds, harbingers of death, who went first for the eyes, and there wasn't anything the poor bastard could do about it hanging there.
Unless, like Rizvah,
Somebody stayed behind with them all.
Nasty stuff, this crucifying, and an image of it shouldn't be comfortable.
To tell the story, the image had to be strident, discordant, and rude.
And within that framework, Jesus is the one forsaken.
Illustrating a Bible is a daunting undertaking, not so much having to do with the enormity of scale, though that too, as with engaging a sacred text.
And vis-a-vis the King James Bible, it has to do with defronting what George Steiner has called the greatest monument of the English language.
Having engaged this text, one then has to grapple with images that depict such sanctity and monumentality and has to wrestle with all the devils and angels that dwell within it.
Moreover, one has to struggle with one's own arrogance.
What light!
Can anybody possibly bring to it today that Jerome, Aquinas, and Buber, Gruenwald, Rembrandt, and Chagall have not already brought to it?
Beyond that, one must be up to the physical and intellectual rigors it requires.
Long hours of study and reading
long finger-numbing hours of work, ten, fourteen hours a day, seven days a week, fifty-two weeks in a year, three and a half years.
And long and often frustrating hours attending to the myriad other details of bookmaking which you will hear more about today.
But above all, one must be willing to risk and endure the inevitable failures and criticisms
One must be willing, as the late Stanley Kubrick said, to look like an idiot.
Sometimes I wonder if I should have taken it all.
Not the work and labor, which I love and look forward to every day of my life, but the cup of the unknown.
The cup that is filled with that which you tell me to do this work, filled with that
unknown which I am afraid to admit to, afraid to call God.
Yes, I thought it was the scheme name.
The scheme name version is based on the screener edition, which is what the title is based on.
And he, you were showing where the 15-11 was showing into words that were not as good as one of them.
And most of you may probably have had that.
It will spiritually get away with the challenges that we all come from, and we get away with all of these persons.
But now, we're headed back to the matter of text two, I think.
But then you have to be still back to the persons who are parasolized by the first numbers.
There's 50 more numbers.
They aren't there.
That's a problem.
My mouth is not weaponized.
So it's kind of .
It's not weaponized.
It's an answer to that.
That would be very cold.
I'm so happy you should have said that.
Why am I able to face this book?
Yeah, that image is John Baxter.
Is that self-porting?
No, actually, it's a friend of mine, Dennis Knowles, who will illustrate her children's books.
Actually, that's a comedy-year book.
Back as well.
It's going to be in the Penelope Cashman book, but it won't be in the deluxe copies of Penelope Cashman, but it won't be in a trade edition without being done.
I read it simply as St.
Hamidman, the block for the first one that causes the very new material.
Nobody's really ever worked with the material before.
So that's the new name of the material called Red and the Great.
It's a synthetic, actually plastic.
It feels like goody-grady.
I wasn't as confident.
I didn't understand how it would be able to present as well.
I mean, I'm not, I'm not, I'm not, I'm not really going to answer that.
I don't know if it's all that long.
So we'll take it later.
We didn't, we didn't, we didn't, we didn't, we didn't, we didn't, we didn't, we didn't, we didn't, we didn't.
Is that good?
Yeah, it's very sweet.